Our story begins when an Iranian ruler summons the legendary hero Rustam to his court.
Something has been terrorizing both man and beast. The ruler promises Rustam riches and glory
if he can defeat the beast. Rustam says, “I’ll take it on. I fear nothing!
This beast will tremble with fear before my blade!”
After battling for three days, the
beast disappears and Rustam is left to wander the countryside. “Ah! This is no ordinary
beast!” He exclaims, “It has evaded all of my tricks and bested my strongest weapons.
Truly, it must be a fierce demon.”  As the sun goes down, Rustam’s eyes begin
to droop and he falls asleep.
The demon Akvan Div comes over the hill in
a great wind and sees Rustam sleeping. “This is my chance! The great Rustam sleeps
like a child.” He picks Rustam up and carries him away.
Akvan Div is only wearing a small waist covering which has a large front slit
that exposes his legs to mid-thigh. He is not wearing a shirt or shoes and
his hair is uncovered, which conveys a feral wildness. Akvan’s lack of Iranian dress standards
highlight that he is an outsider with supernatural status.
Rustam conforms to Iranian dress standards. He wears long sleeves, pant legs, and a turban
under his helmet. Rustam however, balances between the Iranian world and supernatural realm. Being the
son of Zal and Rudabeh, Rustam comes from a mythical lineage. He wears an indigenous
Parthian tiger skin which is associated with mythical abilities. There is resemblance between Rustam’s helmet
and Akvan’s nose, ear, eye and mouth shape as well as Rustam’s lasso and Akvan’s
tail. This suggests that they use similar strategies and may even be related.
Animals frame the main scene. The lion and tiger are looking out from jagged mountains.
They could represent the natural world while the mysterious sea creatures serve as symbols for
the mythical world. Akvan Div is positioned above these creatures suggesting that he has authority
in the supernatural world. In lifting Rustam above his head, Akvan Div appears to have
some control over our hero.
Rustam woke,
And his wise head was filled with consternation
He thought: “So this foul
div hath laid for me
A snare like this! Woe for my strength and courage!”
Akvan Div smugly looks around the valley and says, “You get to choose, oh mighty
invincible Rustam. Do you want to be smashed on these jagged mountains to be eaten
by ravenous tigers and lions, or should I throw you into the sea?”
Below Rustam, we see three hungry animals - the tiger, lion, and sea monster - whose eye
gaze is directed towards Rustam. Their jaws are open like they are hungry and waiting
to consume him. Akvan Div holds Rustam on a purple plate-like disk as though
he is presenting him like a meal before these creatures.
Well, thinks Rustam, whatever I choose, he will trick me and do the opposite. If
he throws me into the sea, I can at least swim and fight the sea’s
perils and survive. Rustam leans back and says, “Ah, a powerful, enlightened Div like yourself
must know that a drowned soul will never see paradise and will only know eternal
misery. Throw me onto the mountain and let those lions and tigers finally see what
a truly brave man looks like.”
Now notice Rustam’s posture and position. Even though the text suggests that he is in
a precarious situation, the image shows a sense of control and command.
He is awake and has a calm, indifferent expression suggesting that despite the circumstances, he
is in control. The natural and mythical creatures are below him including Akvan Div.
Akvan’s kneeling stance and slightly bowed head could be submissive and while Rustam’s elevation suggests
dominance. “Oh, you fool! Eternal damnation for Iran’s legendary hero is what I truly want.
You will be lost and miserable forever. Trusting a Div will be your downfall!”
The Div throws Rustam into the sea. Rustam battles the sea creatures
and swims to shore. He finds the Div and captures him in one form by
saying God’s name. He slays the Div and offers its head to God.
This encounter requires Rustam, a man from demonic lineage, to engage his physical strength and
mythical, trickster qualities. In capturing the Div, Rustam relies and then acknowledges God’s role in
both the natural and mythical world affirming both Iranian and Zoroastrian religious and cultural values.
Rustam then returns to report to the ruler who gives thanks to God and showers
Rustam with treasure.